182819773-serialize-history (#1395)
concord-consortium/collaborative-learning: docs/history-framework.md

  deactivate TreeManager
```

## Serialization

> We store the history of changes to a document in Firestore. Each history entry is stored in a separate Firestore document. These history entry documents are stored in the same way that comments are stored. There is a parent Firestore document that has meta data about the actual CLUE document and then under this parent Firestore document is a collection for the comments and a collection for the history entries.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We store the history of changes to a document in Firestore. Each history entry is stored in a separate Firestore document. These history entry documents are stored in the same way that comments are stored. There is a parent Firestore document that has metadata about the actual CLUE document and then under this parent Firestore document is a collection for the comments and a collection for the history entries.
```

> The history entries are sent up by the TreeManager which is an MST model. In other places we interact with Firestore through react components so we can use hooks. Since we are in the model we just work directly with Firestore.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The history entries are written by the TreeManager which is an MST model. In other places we interact with Firestore through react components so we can use hooks. Since we are in the model we just work directly with Firestore.
```

The history loading currently doesn't do any batching/paging during the load, so if the history gets large enough this might cause problems. There is a FIXME in the code for this. The component is currently monitoring Firestore collection, so if new history events are added they will be shown immediately without having to close and open the history UI. It isn't totally clear how these incremental history entries are handled. I think the `LoadDocumentHistory` component is re-rendered when new events show up and then the history in the TreeManager gets completely replaced with the updated history. In other words the entries aren't really loaded incrementally. We'll probably need to improve this to handle documents with large histories.

> To create the parent document which contains the history entires in Firestore the TreeManager is using out Firebase function `validateCommentableDocument`. This can create either a document associated with a networked teacher or a generic user document. When we tackle handling permissions this document will be required to grant students and teachers access to the history entries of this document.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To create the parent document which contains the history entries in Firestore the TreeManager is using our Firebase function `validateCommentableDocument`. This can create either a document associated with a networked teacher or a generic user document. When we tackle handling permissions it will be necessary to grant students and teachers access to the history entries of this document.
```

### Ordering of history entries

Currently we are using a Firestore server timestamp. This isn't great because the history entries do not always arrive at firestore in the same order that they are created. In particular the first history entry is waiting for the `validateCommentableDocument` to return before being added. The next history entries just check for the existence of the document and if they find it, they are added right away. This can result in the history entries being added out of order. Below are some options for addressing this.

#### Ordering entries based on linked list approach

Store the previous entry's id in the current entry (`previousEntryId`). The first entry will have an undefined previous entry.
Also store a server timestamp.
The query from firestore can order by the server timestamp so the entries are roughly in the right order.

To build the correct order efficiently we can do two passes through the results.

##### Pass 1
First create a map with a type of `{ [entryId] : { entry, nextEntryId }, ...}`.
Now go through the results. For each entry result:

> - add it to the entry value of map, if there is a nextEntryId don't change it

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- add it to the entry value of map, if there is a `nextEntryId` don't change it
```

- take the current entry's `previousEntryId` look this up in the map and add `nextEntryId` to it with this `previousEntryId` value
- if there is no `previousEntryId` save this entry as the first entry
- if the `previousEntryId` already has a different `nextEntryId` it means the history has been corrupted by two or more users writing to history at the same time. Show a warning.

##### Pass 2

> Create a empty array of the history entries.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Create an empty array of the history entries.
```

Start at the first entry, add it to the array.

> Lookup its nextEntryId in the map. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Look up its `nextEntryId` in the map. 
```

> Add this to the array and keep going until you reach an object in the map with no nextEntryId

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Add this to the array and keep going until you reach an object in the map with no `nextEntryId`.
```

##### Problems
As described above, to be safe we have to look at every entry at the beginning of a new session with the document in order to figure out what the previousEntryId should be for the first entry of that session.

Possibly this lookup could be done asynchronously. Just the first entry of the session needs to know this, any future entries can refer to this first entry. But still to be safe all of the entries of the last session need to be downloaded. And this could be a large amount of data.

#### Ordering entries based on an index

Store the index of the entry. The first entry will have an index of 0.

To build the correct order we just request the entries from firestore ordered by this index.

##### Storing requirements
On the start of recording each session we need to know the entry index of the last history entry. This can be found by doing a query with a limit of one sorted by the index in reverse. This would just download the last entry saved.

All entries being written would have to wait for this lookup to occur before they will know their index.

##### Problems

> If multiple users are editing the same document there can be entries with the same index. We can  mitigate this by storing a previousEntryId in each entry. We will know the last entry of the last session because we looked it up to find its index. Even if the sessions start out of order, at some point there will be two entries that have the same previousEntryId (and probably the same index).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If multiple users are editing the same document there can be entries with the same index. We can mitigate this by storing a `previousEntryId` in each entry. We will know the last entry of the last session because we looked it up to find its index. Even if the sessions start out of order, at some point there will be two entries that have the same previousEntryId (and probably the same index).
```

> It will be a little complicated to block the writing of new entries until they know their offset from the last entry of the last session.

Reviewer: Perhaps easier with a cloud function.

We could also put some session info the parent document itself, like a `numberOfSessions` to the document. So then a session index could be added to each history entry document. Then the history entry events could be ordered by the combination of this session index and a history entry index. 

An alternative to querying the entries for the last index would be to store the last history entry in the parent document, but this means that document have to be updated with each new entry. And there is a limit of 1 sec per update. If you want to look into that approach more see:
https://firebase.google.com/docs/firestore/solutions/aggregation

### Serialization TODO:
- [ ] See if we can remove this use of cloud functions to do the network document writes, I think the only reason to use them is for permissions, I'd guess we can create rules that would allow them to be written without the functions. We probably are going to have either do this or change the cloud function so it can support students creating parent documents.

> - [ ] fix ordering issue, currently we are using a server timestamp which gets out of order when the first entry is delayed as the document parent is fetched. The right approach I think is to store the last index in the document and then on each session load this index and start from there. This last index will also be useful when dealing with publishing documents.

Author: I don't think a cloud function would help in this case. We still can't trust the order the entries arrive at the server. So we have to have a client side mechanism to record this ordering. 

I forgot to update this TODO, I kind of ruled out this approach of storing the last index in the parent document because it requires the parent doc has to be updated on every history entry which will likely exceed the 1 update/s sometimes.
